Re: [EE] E2 Planning Meeting Notes - EE - lists.wikimedia.org
 
lists.wikimedia.org
 
 
                                Sign In
                            
                                Sign Up
                            
                            Sign In
                        
                            Sign Up
                        
                        Manage this list
                    
 
 
×
Keyboard Shortcuts
Thread View
j: Next unread message 
k: Previous unread message 
j a: Jump to all threads
               j l: Jump to MailingList overview
             
                            2023
                        
September
August
July
June
May
April
March
February
January
                            2022
                        
December
November
October
September
August
July
June
May
April
March
February
January
                            2021
                        
December
November
October
September
August
July
June
May
April
March
February
January
                            2020
                        
December
November
October
September
August
July
June
May
April
March
February
January
                            2019
                        
December
November
October
September
August
July
June
May
April
March
February
January
                            2018
                        
December
November
October
September
August
July
June
May
April
March
February
January
                            2017
                        
December
November
October
September
August
July
June
May
April
March
February
January
                            2016
                        
December
November
October
September
August
July
June
May
April
March
February
January
                            2015
                        
December
November
October
September
August
July
June
May
April
March
February
January
                            2014
                        
December
November
October
September
August
July
June
May
April
March
February
January
                            2013
                        
December
November
October
September
August
July
June
May
April
March
February
January
            List overview
 Download
thread
Re: [EE] E2 Planning Meeting Notes
Fabrice Florin
                18 Jan
                
                    2013
                
            
                18 Jan
                
                '13
                
            
3 a.m.
 
Thanks, Terry.
First off, I would like to welcome all of the folks who have joined our now-public Editor
Engagement list in recent days!
We're really happy that you are interested in participating in our discussions of
editor engagement goals and how we implement them.
To give a bit more context to folks who did not participate in our discussion earlier, I
wanted to clarify that this particular thread is about a planning meeting which we had on
Tuesday with the E2 Editor Engagement team, which focuses on developing large-scale editor
engagement features such as notifications (code-name Echo) and user-to-user messaging
(code-name Flow). 
The purpose of that meeting was to plan our roadmap for the E2 team this quarter
(Jan.-March 2013 - Q3 of the WMF fiscal year). Since this mailing list is now public, I
have included our meeting notes below, along with responses for Howie Fung (product
development director at WMF), Terry Chay (features engineering director at WMF), as well
as community liaison Oliver Keyes (who most experienced Wikipedians already know).
To learn more, see our meeting slides, which will soon be published on Commons:
https://docs.google.com/a/wikimedia.org/presentation/d/1ps7-i_fISUldycH1LFr…
And we will also update this preliminary E2 strategy planning page with the final
objectives in coming days: 
http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Editor_Engagement/2013_strategy_planning_(Fea…
We welcome your comments on this proposed E2 quarterly plan for Q3, so we can finalize it
with your help in coming days. You can learn more about our overall plans for editor
engagement this fiscal year on this WMF editor engagement goals page.
And if you are not already familiar with our editor engagement team, you can meet some of
our team members on this editor engagement hub:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Editor_Engagement
Welcome aboard everybody! We welcome a healthy discussion with you all on this mailing
list.
Fabrice
_______________________________
Fabrice Florin
Product Manager
Editor Engagement Features (E2)
Wikimedia Foundation
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Fabrice_Florin_(WMF)
__________________________________
From: Fabrice Florin &lt;fflorin(a)wikimedia.org&gt;
Subject: E2 Planning Meeting Notes
Date: January 16, 2013 6:04:34 PM PST
To: Howie Fung &lt;hfung(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>, Terry Chay &lt;tchay(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>, Ryan
Kaldari &lt;rkaldari(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>, Benny Situ &lt;bsitu(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>, Luke
Welling &lt;lwelling(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>, Matthias Mullie &lt;mmullie(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>,
Brandon Harris &lt;bharris(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>, Vibha Bamba &lt;vbamba(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>,
Oliver Keyes &lt;okeyes(a)wikimedia.org&gt;
Cc: Erik Moeller &lt;erik(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>, Steven Walling
&lt;swalling(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>, Maryana Pinchuk &lt;mpinchuk(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>, Dario
Taraborelli &lt;dtaraborelli(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>, James Forrester
&lt;jforrester(a)wikimedia.org&gt;
Hey everyone,
Thanks for a great planning session yesterday!
I think we made some good progress together, defined a viable roadmap for Echo, outlined
our goals for Flow, and raised key questions which we will want to answer together in
coming weeks.
Here are my meeting notes, to summarize the key points we discussed together. Please let
me know right away if I made any errors or missed anything. These updated slides provide
more insights.
1. Overall E2 Plan
We reviewed our overall goals for the E2 team in fiscal 2012-2013, which are to help
recruit new editors and retain existing editors, in order to reverse Wikipedia's
editor decline. 
Specific milestones for this quarter include:
* Launch Echo first release on English Wikipedia by March 2013
* Deploy Article Feedback to 100% on English Wikipedia by March 2013
* Release first beta for Flow on MediaWiki by June 2013
To learn more, see our E2 timeline for 2013, along with these research slides on user
activity through our engagement funnel. More background is provided on our E2 strategy
page, which will be updated in coming days. Note that we had a separate planning session
for Article Feedback, which I will report on later this week.
2. Echo Roadmap
We discussed and refined this Echo roadmap together, along with these timelines for
features and notifications. We agreed to ship a minimum viable product (MVP) by the end of
this quarter, which would include the core features and a small set of notifications
described below. This would be a limited release aimed at new editors on the English
Encyclopedia, but also available to other users on an opt-in basis. 
Along with that release, we would provide in-house developer guidelines and support for
other WMF teams (e.g.: E3) that might want to add notifications to Echo for their
purposes. After the first Echo deployment on en-wiki, our team's development resources
would shift to support a first release of Flow on MediaWiki by the end of June.
3. Features
We agreed to complete these core Echo features this quarter: flyout, archive, emails, HTML
email, preferences, dismiss, bundling, job queue and metrics. For more details, visit our
feature requirements page. 
We also discussed other possible feature clusters that we might take on if we can get more
resources for Echo in the coming year: API, cross-wiki and possible interactions with
watchlist or talk page. If feasible, we will aim to architect Echo so that an API or
cross-wiki connectivity could be added more easily at a later date. We agreed to wait
until Flow is more fully defined before considering watchlist or talk page upgrades.
4. Notifications
We identified a limited set of notifications for the first release, starting with those we
have developed so far (talkpage post, edit reversion, page review, page link, welcome and
user mention). 
We also discussed developing a few more notifications, if time allows, once core features
are done. This small set of new notifications would be selected in consultation with the
E3 team, Oliver and community members and be spread out between these user groups: new
members, new editors and active editors. 
We would also invite other in-house WMF teams like E3 to develop more notifications
independently. For more details on notifications now under consideration, visit our
feature requirements page or check our prioritized list.
5. Maintenance & Localization
The team discussed the need for maintenance and localization resources to keep updating
Echo and support its deployment on a few other wikis, after we switch our development
focus to Flow. It's likely that new features or revisions will be needed on en-wiki
based on community feedback, and that Echo will need to be customized for different wikis.
The current plan does not have resources allocated for these tasks after we switch to
Flow. 
To address this gap, we will estimate the scope of additional resources needed, so they
can be included in next year's plan.
6. Flow
Brandon presented his vision for Flow, describing it as a personal feed of events related
to your interest graph, based on your subscriptions to people, articles or conversation
threads on MediaWiki sites. 
We discussed narrowing down that scope for a first minimum viable product (MVP) focused on
user-to-user messaging for Q4  of this fiscal year. To that end, we will start periodic
design reviews in coming weeks, and involve the E2 team in more focused planning meetings
by March, once Echo and Article Feedback are ready for deployment.
Please let me know right away if you have any questions or comments about this overall
plan for Echo and Flow in Q3, so I can update our strategy pages and slides accordingly. 
I will also start writing a blog post about Echo this week, to be published later this
month, focusing on the current version on MediaWiki, and summarizing these goals for this
quarter. This will also be a good opportunity to promote our job opening for a Software
Engineer for E2 (if you haven't already, please help us spread the word by sharing
this job description with your community). 
Thanks again, and look forward to our next steps together!
Fabrice
On Jan 15, 2013, at 10:25 AM, Fabrice Florin wrote:
...  Hi guys,
 
 I look forward to our E2 quarterly planning meeting today at 10:30am PT in Yongle (and
via Skype for Matthias and Oliver).
 
 The goal of this planning session is to get together as a team to review this
quarter's roadmap and make sure that we're focused on the most important areas, as
well as surface dependencies between teams. The main deliverable for this session will be
a rough map of key features our teams will work on over the next quarter. 
 
 Here's our proposed agenda for this 2-hour meeting:
 • Overview ~ 15 mins.
 • Echo ~ 60 mins.
 • Flow ~ 30 mins.
 • Wrapup ~ 15 mins.
 • Group Photo
 
 Here are the slides we prepared to guide our discussion:
https://docs.google.com/a/wikimedia.org/presentation/d/1ps7-i_fISUldycH1LFr…
 
 Other related documents include:
 
 E2 Planning page (you are welcome to add your notes to this team page):
 http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Editor_Engagement/2013_strategy_planning_(Fea…
 
 Echo Timeline:
https://docs.google.com/a/wikimedia.org/spreadsheet/ccc?key=0Aq_75_5y5sKWdF…
 
 Feature Requirements:
 http://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Echo/Feature_requirements
 
 I look forward to a productive discussion with you all.
 
 Speak to you soon,
 
 
 Fabrice
 
 
 _______________________________
 
 Fabrice Florin
 Product Manager
 Editor Engagement Features (E2)
 Wikimedia Foundation
 
 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Fabrice_Florin_(WMF)
 
 Donate to keep Wikipedia free:
 https://donate.wikimedia.org/ 
_______________________________
...  
 
 On Jan 16, 2013, at 10:25 PM, Howie Fung wrote:
 
> 
> On Wed, Jan 16, 2013 at 6:04 PM, Fabrice Florin &lt;fflorin(a)wikimedia.org&gt; wrote:
> 4. Notifications
> We identified a limited set of notifications for the first release, starting with
those we have developed so far (talkpage post, edit reversion, page review, page link,
welcome and user mention). 
> 
> We also discussed developing a few more notifications, if time allows, once core
features are done. This small set of new notifications would be selected in consultation
with the E3 team, Oliver and community members and be spread out between these user
groups: new members, new editors and active editors. 
> 
> We would also invite other in-house WMF teams like E3 to develop more notifications
independently. For more details on notifications now under consideration, visit our
feature requirements page or check our prioritized list.
> 
> Specifically, we discussed focusing the discussion around further notifications to
the following 3 areas.  This is not to say that the team will commit to all or any of
these notifications, but rather that the discussion around further notifications will be
limited to the following areas (in addition to the notifications that are currently in
development):
> Positive notification for the user who has completed an unreverted edit/happy path. 
> Rationale: Oftentimes, this user receives no response from the community and it would
be good to introduce some positive feedback.  The assumption here is that under some
definition of unreverted, these users are well-intentioned and could become constructive
editors.
> One notification that would be valuable to the experienced editor.  
> Rationale: the existing feature set is targeted mainly at the new user.  This is
intentional since experienced users know where to get information.  But it would be nice
if we had at least one feature that filled a need for the experienced editor.  Caveat: the
team needs to feel like it will be able to manage the subsequent feature requests that
will inevitably come with an experienced-editor feature.
> Discuss with the E3 team how to make watchlist (and the "notifications"
inherent in watchlist) more visible.  
> Rationale: Watchlists and Echo were designed to work as a system for surfacing things
that happen on WP.  The team deliberately identified certain items as out of scope of Echo
since they would be covered by watchlist.  However, if we start Flow work in Q4 (April
2013), the earliest the team could start working on the watchlist/flow integration would
be Q1 of next fiscal year.  This means that realistically, we're probably looking at 9
months until we start making major improvements to the watchlist experience [1].  We need
to at a minimum let users know that the watchlist exists and potentially make some
preference changes to make watchlists more consumable.
> Howie
> 
> [1] 
> 
> Apr - June: user to user messaging
> 
> July - Sep: watchlist/flow integration (which will need to be prioritized along other
flow items)
> 
> 
>  
On Jan 16, 2013, at 11:46 PM, Fabrice Florin wrote:
...  Thanks, Howie.
 
 I appreciate this added level of detail and rationales for each area of investigation. 
 
 I had left out these details to keep the report short and sweet, but already spend an
hour honing in on these three areas with Oliver today, and plan to do the same with Steven
tomorrow, then synthesize both meetings and review them with Vibha and Kaldari next week.
 
 The first and third areas (positive and watchlist notifications) fill in nicely the
missing gaps which we had previously identified in our research on a new user's first
steps, as shown in these slides.
 
 And Oliver will prepare a short list of candidates for the second area (experienced
editor), culled from this updated notifications list, which we reviewed together today
(yellow section).
 
 Rest assured that these three specific areas will be well covered in our proposal for
final new features for this release.
 
 Cheers,
 
 Fabrice 
On Jan 17, 2013, at 9:48 AM, Fabrice Florin wrote:
...  Thanks, Terry.
 
 I appreciate your clarifications and have responded to some of your comments below.
 
 Overall, it appears that we are on the same page on key objectives, which was the primary
purpose of this planning sessions.
 
 I look forward to addressing unresolved action items in coming days. Our goal is to do
this in small teams, rather than in a large group discussion. When the small groups have
prepared specific recommendations, they can present them to the whole team for discussion,
to make the most effective use of everyone's limited time.
 
 I would also like to remind everyone that if we could recruit a new engineer on the E2
team right away, a lot of the hard decisions we are trying to make about which new
notifications can be squeezed in this quarter would be reduced, because that person could
work on getting a few of these done, working off the templates already built by Kaldari
and Benny. To that end, I encourage you all to post about this job description in your
community if you haven't already.
 
 To be continued,
 
 
 Fabrice
 
 
 On Jan 16, 2013, at 11:56 PM, Terry Chay wrote:
 
  Fabrice,
 
 Thanks for this summary.
 
 I believe the purpose was to prepare for the E2 quarterly review (with respect to the
Echo project, in particular, so this is excepting Flow (which hasn't been started) and
AFTv5 (which is on another thread and will be heading toward completion)).  
 Actually, the purpose of this planning session, as initially proposed by Howie, was
unrelated to the quarterly review, which may not happen for a while. Our intent was to get
everyone on the same page, ask for ideas from the team and address unresolved issues
together. I think we have accomplished that initial goal.
 
  Given that I think there were three outcomes we
need to focus on with the realization that we'll have to present this to Erik and
Sue:
 
 1. To note some unresolved action items
 2. To discuss what has been done for last quarter (for Echo and AFTv5, we should probably
note that this is the first quarter of E2 team development for Echo because PageTriage ran
over, and we note that AFTv5 lost Matthias for 1 month to WIkiVoyage)
 3. To give the plan for the next quarter
   
 These are good action items for when we are invited to prepare for a quarterly review.
 
  We also discussed developing a few more
notifications, if time allows, once core features are done. This small set of new
notifications would be selected in consultation with the E3 team, Oliver and community
members and be spread out between these user groups: new members, new editors and active
editors.   
 
 With respect to (1) unresolved actions , there were three action items we need to resolve
before the quarterly review. I think Fabrice is confusing these three in the sentence
above (no worries, sometimes I can't read my notes either).
 
 In my notes they are:
 
 1. Watchlists for E3
 2. Placeholder for power users
 3. Happy Path
   
 
 Thanks for clarifying these points. Howie had already done this last night, as outlined
below. I had also included them in my slides, though the wording may not have been as
clear as it could have. We are all in agreement on these objectives, even if we are using
slightly different words to express them. ;o)
 
 
  Now I may have been too drunk to rattle that off
the top of my head last night but I believe this means:
 
 1. Watchlists are a notification in plan but what this means was not specificed. Some of
this sounds overlapping with E3's onboarding experiment ("did you know you have a
watchlist?"), and some of it may be done in notifications (for instance, the first n
times a click on watchlist (default off for experienced editors) could pop a notification
saying there are new events in the watchlist until the user builds a habit. It makes sense
to actually resolve with E3 team what that is since "n" at least and other
things are probably best determined as an experiment and implemented by E3 (using the
hooks already provided in Echo). We should sync up with them on what "watchlist
notifications" mean.  
 Yes, we have already discussed different ways to make sure that new users are aware that
1) they have a watchlist and 2) there are new items in that watchlist. A first approach is
to send a one-time notification 10 days after registration ('did you know you have a
watchlist?'), which is really easy to do, because it is triggered by a date, but may
not be enough by itself. Another solution is to send a bundled notification if they have
not visited their watchlist in a while, informing them there is new activity on that page
("You have x new events on your watchlist'), which is a bit more complex, but
appears doable in our time-frame. A third way is to put a little counter next to the
watchlist link in the user menu, so they can see there are new items. We have also
discussed the idea of automatically adding pages that you start or edit to your watchlist,
if you are a new user, which everyone agrees is a good idea, but which we have not scoped
out yet from a development standpoint. I had not yet head the idea you propose above,
which I look forward to discussing further.
 
 I have a meeting with Steven this afternoon to go over all this in detail, so we can
determine how these ideas can integrate with E3's plans for onboarding new users. We
also plan to discuss a possible collaboration to make some of these ideas happen this
quarter, as well as explore the possibility of E3 taking on development of some new
notifications next quarter, if it fits their overall goals.
 
  
 2. I'd like to find one or two low-risk power-editor notifications to be done for
March as long as they can added under the following criteria
 - will not delay the release
 - are feasible, low effort in engineering (Kaldari and Benny approved)
 - will be seen positively by the editor community (a feature they would actually want)
 My thinking is  If we don't do this, I'm worried that Echo will end up becoming a
ghetto like MoodBar, or be seen by the editor community as being a thing that no real
editor could use..  
 I completely agree with your concerns, which we share with Oliver and others on our team.
I also agree with your proposed criteria for selection. I would add one more criteria,
which I proposed to Oliver yesterday: make sure that the selected features give us the
most bang for the buck, so they can be used by as many power users as possible over a
period of time. So this would give a slightly lower priority to notifications that are
used infrequently (e.g. one-time notices) or that can only used by a small group of users
(e.g. admins only). 
 
 Oliver and I had a long conversation about all this yesterday, and I defer to him to
recommend notifications that would generally address these criteria and help him sell this
new product to as many experienced users as possible. For example, in yesterday's
conversation, we identified a couple useful notifications which would benefit many active
editors ('your page was rated or featured', or 'x readers posted useful
feedback on your page'). You can see some of the notification ideas we discussed at
the end of this Google spreadsheet (in the yellow section). The next step is to boil down
all these ideas to a short list, and run them by more editors, so we can identify the best
prospects for development later this quarter. Oliver and I will work closely together to
make this happen in coming weeks. 
 
  However, Echo is not LiquidThreads—our
notifications system is widely perceived as ad hoc and broken. There should be some
notifications that would give Echo a modest amount of utility to the power user, and they
will welcome. I could be wrong so if Oliver can't find anything that Kaldari
doesn't think is too much work, I'm not married here. (Suggestions for Oliver: 1)
userrights notifications; 2) someone blocked has left a note on talk page (currently
handled by editor habit of watchlist the talk pages of people they've blocked)).
 
 3. Howie has pointed out the current way MediaWiki interacts with the user are negative
in nature (you've been reverted, etc.). A lot of studies have shown that it takes 5
positive reinforcements to make up for one negative one. Howie would like us to have that
ratio or better in the notifications we send which he calls the "Happy Path."
Notifications that provide a positive reinforcement should be added to the spec. Some
thought on what those are needs to be discussed and spec'd.
   
 Yes, focusing on positive notifications is a goal which I have advocated repeatedly for
several months now, and our entire team is onboard with it. We have been discussing
options that could help us serve that goal since November and have already identified a
number of positive notification ideas in this 'Positive' section of our feature
requirements page. However, a challenge we face is how to give positive reinforcement to a
new editor after their first few edits. One possible solution we have discussed is giving
new users a bundled notification that '20 people have contributed to this page since
your last edit'. While this type of activity is currently handled by the watchlist,
this type of 'contributions' notification could have a positive impact in getting
the new user to go back to a page they edited earlier (particularly if they don't yet
feel motivated to use the watchlist). This is almost certainly better than only sending
them negative notifications when their edits are reverted (which is like a slap in the
face) -- or sending them no notifications whatsoever after their first edits (which is
what we are doing now). This problem can be illustrated by this new editors slide in our
planning deck.
 
 
  When 1-3 is resolved, I think we need to change
the slide:
https://docs.google.com/a/wikimedia.org/presentation/d/1ps7-i_fISUldycH1LFr…
 
 (BTW I think this shouldn't be a GANTT chart (neither should the echo features slide
before it). It makes engineering look like a factory. It should simply be a list of
notifications for Q3 release (with a short description/example/mockup of what they
mean/might look like), followed by a list (with no description) of features that might be
considered later. Same goes for the echo features slide.
   
 I think there is value in having a rough timeline showing when we think the bulk of the
development effort will take place.
 
 However, if you prefer simple bullet lists, here is one for next features, and here is
one for future features. We also have a preliminary table for new user notifications,
which we can adapt to include the other proposed notifications discussed above. 
 
  Specific milestones for this quarter include:
 * Launch Echo first release on English Wikipedia by March 2013
 * Deploy Article Feedback to 100% on English Wikipedia by March 2013
 * Release first beta for Flow on MediaWiki by June 2013  
 As for (3) give guidance for Q3. The point is a list of stuff we want to do for the March
release on enwiki in end of Q3.
 The idea here is to free up the team for continued development on Echo or transition to
starting Flow in Q4 (with the target of end of Q4 release of Flow on mediawiki.org). (So
milestones for this quarter are the first two, not the third.)
   
 Good point about my error for the third bullet point for Flow. It should have been
focused on Q3, not Q4. My apologies.
 
 I am happy to provide more guidance for Q3 on Flow as I get more familiar with this
product. The only guidance I can offer for Flow at this early stage is to jointly develop
a product plan and design spec for a minimum viable product focused on user-to-user
messaging. Both the plan and the design spec should be complete by the end of Q3 at least
, so we can start development with a larger team in Q4. So the only milestone I can
recommend now would be:
 
 * complete Flow product plan and design spec by March 2013
 
 Sound good?
 
 
  With respect to the first specifically, I
modified/cleaned up the slide
<https://docs.google.com/a/wikimedia.org/presentation/d/1ps7-i_fISUldycH1LFrJ45dkIF9fwjdJP6dYbV6HaBY/edit#slide=id.g77ef3ac0_1_256>:
   
 Thanks for the improvements!
 
 To reduce visual clutter, I tightened this slide just a bit, for readability, but I
totally agree with every item you proposed.
 
 Note that we already have a working definition of defaults by user rights on our feature
requirements page.
 
  •  focus on new users (but make it usable by
active editors)
 •  complete core features (flyout, "archive", prefs/userrights, job queue,
bundling, metrics, HTML email)
 •  add a few more notifications (for new members/editors. active editors, "happy
path")
 •  deploy limited release on en-wiki (default preferences depending on new/exisitng
editor (new editor focused notifications (ex. pagelinks) default off))
 •   fix bugs + critical feature tweaks (as needed, prioritized by urgency)
 •  provide in-house developer support (through hooks, i18n and dev guidelines for teams
like E3)
   estimate maintenance + i18n support (2013-2014 plan)
 
 [My changes:
 -  "archive" is in quotes because it is not persistent
 - added "userrrights" to preferences (Kaldari)
 - moved HTML e-mail to end of core features because it's a non essential deliverable
(though it's almost done anyway)
 - moved Howie's Happy Path into "few more notifications"
 - merged new members/editors from new members and new editors
 - changed the default preferences to note that some defaults actually dependent on who
(for instance, if userrights gets it, that should be default on for existing users, not
off, but things like e-mail notifications on pagelinks better be default off)
 - explained what "in-house developer support" actually means (mediawiki hooks)
 - changed localization (which is a translation task) to internationalization (which is a
programming one)]
 
 I question whether Flow should be mentioned in guidance since this is supposed to be a
review meeting. So while it's a summary of prep, we shouldn't be presenting it
until next quarter.
 
 
 If anyone cares, here are my notes from the meeting:
 
 <2013-01-15 E2 Q3 review.html>
   
On Jan 17, 2013, at 10:24 AM, Terry Chay wrote:
...  Wanted to send this to we because people like Aaron
may have ideas especially re happy path.
 
 Tl;dr Howie would like to shift focus of default Echo notifications to ones that generate
positive messages.
 
 Sent from my <free corporate advertising removed at the request of the owner>
 
 Begin forwarded message:
 
  From: Oliver Keyes &lt;okeyes(a)wikimedia.org&gt;
 Date: January 17, 2013, 8:01:25 AM PST
 To: Terry Chay &lt;tchay(a)wikimedia.org&gt;
 Cc: Fabrice Florin &lt;fflorin(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>, Howie Fung &lt;hfung(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>,
Ryan Kaldari &lt;rkaldari(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>, Benny Situ &lt;bsitu(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>, Luke
Welling &lt;lwelling(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>, Matthias Mullie &lt;mmullie(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>,
Brandon Harris &lt;bharris(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>, Vibha Bamba &lt;vbamba(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>,
Erik Moeller &lt;erik(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>, Steven Walling &lt;swalling(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>,
Maryana Pinchuk &lt;mpinchuk(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>, Dario Taraborelli
&lt;dtaraborelli(a)wikimedia.org&gt;rg>, James Forrester &lt;jforrester(a)wikimedia.org&gt;
 Subject: Re: E2 Planning Meeting Notes
 
 
 
 On 17 January 2013 07:56, Terry Chay &lt;tchay(a)wikimedia.org&gt; wrote:
 Fabrice,
 
 Thanks for this summary.
 
 I believe the purpose was to prepare for the E2 quarterly review (with respect to the
Echo project, in particular, so this is excepting Flow (which hasn't been started) and
AFTv5 (which is on another thread and will be heading toward completion)). Given that I
think there were three outcomes we need to focus on with the realization that we'll
have to present this to Erik and Sue:
 
 1. To note some unresolved action items
 2. To discuss what has been done for last quarter (for Echo and AFTv5, we should probably
note that this is the first quarter of E2 team development for Echo because PageTriage ran
over, and we note that AFTv5 lost Matthias for 1 month to WIkiVoyage)
 3. To give the plan for the next quarter
 
 
  We also discussed developing a few more
notifications, if time allows, once core features are done. This small set of new
notifications would be selected in consultation with the E3 team, Oliver and community
members and be spread out between these user groups: new members, new editors and active
editors.   
 
 With respect to (1) unresolved actions , there were three action items we need to resolve
before the quarterly review. I think Fabrice is confusing these three in the sentence
above (no worries, sometimes I can't read my notes either).
 
 In my notes they are:
 
 1. Watchlists for E3
 2. Placeholder for power users
 3. Happy Path
 
 Now I may have been too drunk to rattle that off the top of my head last night but I
believe this means:
 
 1. Watchlists are a notification in plan but what this means was not specificed. Some of
this sounds overlapping with E3's onboarding experiment ("did you know you have a
watchlist?"), and some of it may be done in notifications (for instance, the first n
times a click on watchlist (default off for experienced editors) could pop a notification
saying there are new events in the watchlist until the user builds a habit. It makes sense
to actually resolve with E3 team what that is since "n" at least and other
things are probably best determined as an experiment and implemented by E3 (using the
hooks already provided in Echo). We should sync up with them on what "watchlist
notifications" mean.
 
 2. I'd like to find one or two low-risk power-editor notifications to be done for
March as long as they can added under the following criteria
 - will not delay the release
 - are feasible, low effort in engineering (Kaldari and Benny approved)
 - will be seen positively by the editor community (a feature they would actually want)
 My thinking is  If we don't do this, I'm worried that Echo will end up becoming a
ghetto like MoodBar, or be seen by the editor community as being a thing that no real
editor could use.. However, Echo is not LiquidThreads—our notifications system is widely
perceived as ad hoc and broken. There should be some notifications that would give Echo a
modest amount of utility to the power user, and they will welcome. I could be wrong so if
Oliver can't find anything that Kaldari doesn't think is too much work, I'm
not married here. (Suggestions for Oliver: 1) userrights notifications; 2) someone blocked
has left a note on talk page (currently handled by editor habit of watchlist the talk
pages of people they've blocked)).
 
 If Kaldari can verify they're not too much of a pain we can go with these - I'd
like it if we could throw a core group of suggestions at editors and see what sticks.
 
 
 3. Howie has pointed out the current way MediaWiki interacts with the user are negative
in nature (you've been reverted, etc.). A lot of studies have shown that it takes 5
positive reinforcements to make up for one negative one. Howie would like us to have that
ratio or better in the notifications we send which he calls the "Happy Path."
Notifications that provide a positive reinforcement should be added to the spec. Some
thought on what those are needs to be discussed and spec'd.
 
 One idea I had for this yesterday; so, the main thing kicking us in the arse is that
MediaWiki doesn't really have a way of registering that an edit is good. However:
MediaWiki doesn't really register that edits are bad, either: a lot of that is done
through third-party plugins like Huggle or bots like ClueBot - things patrolling for
vandalism. When they see a good edit, they've got no way of saying anything and are
silent. When they've got a bad edit, they warn/revert/whatever.
 
 What we might want to do is build a "your edit was fine! $thing reviewed it! Great
job!" notification that can be kicked through the API. We can then hook into a lot of
the third-party development that's been done on anti-vandalism tools. So, in this
world, instead of "approve of edit (silently), disapprove (revert and warn)",
Huggle/ClueBot/so on send a notification to the user who made the 'good' edit
saying "this was good! Keep it up". We'd need to make puppy eyes at the
third-party people to implement, but it's actually a lot less work than building the
notification and also finding some trigger in MediaWiki for it to take its cues off, and
has a better signal:noise ratio than any trigger I've yet heard discussed.
  
 When 1-3 is resolved, I think we need to change the slide:
https://docs.google.com/a/wikimedia.org/presentation/d/1ps7-i_fISUldycH1LFr…
 
 (BTW I think this shouldn't be a GANTT chart (neither should the echo features slide
before it). It makes engineering look like a factory. It should simply be a list of
notifications for Q3 release (with a short description/example/mockup of what they
mean/might look like), followed by a list (with no description) of features that might be
considered later. Same goes for the echo features slide.
 
 
  Specific milestones for this quarter include:
 * Launch Echo first release on English Wikipedia by March 2013
 * Deploy Article Feedback to 100% on English Wikipedia by March 2013
 * Release first beta for Flow on MediaWiki by June 2013  
 As for (3) give guidance for Q3. The point is a list of stuff we want to do for the March
release on enwiki in end of Q3. The idea here is to free up the team for continued
development on Echo or transition to starting Flow in Q4 (with the target of end of Q4
release of Flow on mediawiki.org). (So milestones for this quarter are the first two, not
the third.)
 
 With respect to the first specifically, I modified/cleaned up the slide
<https://docs.google.com/a/wikimedia.org/presentation/d/1ps7-i_fISUldycH1LFrJ45dkIF9fwjdJP6dYbV6HaBY/edit#slide=id.g77ef3ac0_1_256>:
 
 •  focus on new users (but make it usable by active editors)
 •  complete core features (flyout, "archive", prefs/userrights, job queue,
bundling, metrics, HTML email)
 •  add a few more notifications (for new members/editors. active editors, "happy
path")
 •  deploy limited release on en-wiki (default preferences depending on new/exisitng
editor (new editor focused notifications (ex. pagelinks) default off))
 •   fix bugs + critical feature tweaks (as needed, prioritized by urgency)
 •  provide in-house developer support (through hooks, i18n and dev guidelines for teams
like E3)
   estimate maintenance + i18n support (2013-2014 plan)
 
 [My changes:
 -  "archive" is in quotes because it is not persistent
 - added "userrrights" to preferences (Kaldari)
 - moved HTML e-mail to end of core features because it's a non essential deliverable
(though it's almost done anyway)
 - moved Howie's Happy Path into "few more notifications"
 - merged new members/editors from new members and new editors
 - changed the default preferences to note that some defaults actually dependent on who
(for instance, if userrights gets it, that should be default on for existing users, not
off, but things like e-mail notifications on pagelinks better be default off)
 - explained what "in-house developer support" actually means (mediawiki hooks)
 - changed localization (which is a translation task) to internationalization (which is a
programming one)]
 
 I question whether Flow should be mentioned in guidance since this is supposed to be a
review meeting. So while it's a summary of prep, we shouldn't be presenting it
until next quarter.
 
 
 If anyone cares, here are my notes from the meeting:
 
 The notes align with my recollection of what was discussed. 
 
 
 
 -- 
 Oliver Keyes
 Community Liaison, Product Development
 Wikimedia Foundation  _______________________________________________
 EE mailing list
 EE(a)lists.wikimedia.org
 https://lists.wikimedia.org/mailman/listinfo/ee 
Attachments:
attachment.htm
                (text/html — 52.9 KB)
            
 0
 0
            Reply
        
Back to the thread
            Back to the list
        
 
            Powered by HyperKitty version 1.3.4.
        